Docs: Plugin E2E - Add locating elements article (#745)
grafana/plugin-tools: docusaurus/docs/e2e-test-a-plugin/locating-elements.md

---
id: locating-elements
title: Locating elements for E2E tests
description: How to locate elements on the page
draft: true
keywords:
  - grafana
  - plugins
  - plugin
  - e2e
  - example test
sidebar_position: 30
---

> # Locating elements for E2E tests

Reviewer: Just sharing a thought rather than requesting a change. The term "locating" seems to make sense from a playwright perspective, I just wonder if we need to call out more that it is the playwright nomenclature given the use of selectors -> selecting within what we've provided thus far.

Author: Yeah the fact that `locator` is a thing in Playwright is a bit confusing. 

I wonder if it would make sense to avoid the word `locate` in the first section, and save it for the second heading when Playwright is being mentioned the first time?  Then we can link the Playwright docs, making it obvious that it's an actual entity in the Playwright world.

Author: See [this](https://github.com/grafana/plugin-tools/pull/745/commits/c8d59ef7fddac4ce9b22438359031360bd85c58c) commit. Let me know what you think.

Reviewer: The challenge is also in the page title itself. I like the changes in that commit though

Reviewer: Ignoring Grafana or Playwright precedent, I would think of "Selecting UI elements" or "Navigating to UI elements" for the function, but I would defer to you on which (including leave as is) is the best.

Reviewer: and my prior approval on the PR stands without changing anything

Author: Yeah I like `Selecting UI elements` - let's go with that.

Ever since Grafana 7.0.0, end-to-end tests in Grafana have relied on selectors defined in the [`@grafana/e2e-selectors`](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/tree/main/packages/grafana-e2e-selectors) package to locate elements in the Grafana UI. 

> Locating Grafana UI elements can be challenging because the selector may be defined on either the `aria-label` attribute or the `data-testid` attribute. In the beginning, the selectors used the `aria-label` attribute, but now most selectors have been migrated to use the `data-testid` attribute instead.

Reviewer 2: Grafana style prefers simple verb tenses.

# Locating Grafana UI elements

All pages defined by `@grafana/plugin-e2e` expose a `getByTestIdOrAriaLabel` method that locates elements using the right HTML attribute. Whenever you want to resolve a Playwright locator based on a Grafana UI selector, you should always use this method.

> ```tsx

Reviewer 2: I believe Docusaurus supports 'tsx' for typescript. See https://github.com/FormidableLabs/prism-react-renderer/blob/c914fdea48625ba59c8022174bb3df1ed802ce4d/packages/generate-prism-languages/index.ts#L9-L23

Author: This is actually not tsx. tsx should be used in typescript based react applications that uses jsx for rendering.

> All pages defined by `@grafana/plugin-e2e` expose a `getByTestIdOrAriaLabel` method that returns a Playwright locator that resolves to element(s) selected using the right HTML attribute. Whenever you want to resolve a Playwright locator based on a Grafana UI selector, you should always use this method.

Reviewer: > All pages defined by `@grafana/plugin-e2e`

nit: this makes me ask "which pages do we define" and would want to see a list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All pages defined by `@grafana/plugin-e2e` expose a `getByTestIdOrAriaLabel` method that returns a Playwright locator that resolves to element(s) selected, using the appropriate HTML attribute as defined on the element. Whenever you want to resolve a Playwright locator based on a Grafana UI selector, you should always use this method.
```

maybe clearer, maybe not. Just a suggestion as I felt "right" was ambiguous.

Author: >nit: this makes me ask "which pages do we define" and would want to see a list.

yeah I see what you mean. it's all the files that have the `Page` suffix in [this](https://github.com/grafana/plugin-tools/tree/main/packages/plugin-e2e/src/models) folder. Would be great if we had an `API reference > Models` section in the docs that was auto generated from the code. Then we could refer to that from within this article. Maybe we can get back to this once we have ways of auto-generating docs from tsdoc? (gonna bring this up with the rest of the team, but doesn't feel like it's prioritized right now)

Reviewer: wdyt about just adding the link to that folder on "All `[pages](https://github.com/grafana/plugin-tools/tree/main/packages/plugin-e2e/src/models)` defined..."? I agree with the future direction, but this feels a reasonable stop gap

Author: 👍

panelEditPage.getByTestIdOrAriaLabel(selectors.components.CodeEditor.container).click();
```

## The `selectors` fixture

> Selectors defined in the `@grafana/e2e-selectors` package are tied to a specific Grafana version. This means that the selectors can change from one version to another. When a new E2E test session is started, `@grafana/plugin-e2e` checks what version of Grafana is under test and resolves selectors that are associated with the current version. The selectors are provided through the `selectors` fixture.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Selectors defined in the `@grafana/e2e-selectors` package are tied to a specific Grafana version. This means that the selectors can change from one version to another. When a new E2E test session is started, `@grafana/plugin-e2e` checks what version of Grafana is under test and resolves selectors that are associated with the running version. The selectors are provided through the `selectors` fixture.
```

wdyt? current could imply latest released vs "local"

Author: yep better!

sidebar_position: 30
---

> # Locating elements for E2E tests

Author: Should we not use `e2e` rather than `E2E`

Reviewer 2: Why do you think it should be `e22`? The word `e2e` is not found in either the Google Developer Style Guide or the Microsoft Developer Style Guide, so I consulted the top few pages of a Google search and found E2E as the most common variant. I would go with E2E unless you know a good reason not to. After the PRs are published, I can do a global search/replace to enforce consistency.

Reviewer 2: also this: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/E2E

Ever since Grafana 7.0.0, end-to-end tests in Grafana have relied on selectors defined in the [`@grafana/e2e-selectors`](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/tree/main/packages/grafana-e2e-selectors) package to locate elements in the Grafana UI. 

Locating Grafana UI elements can be challenging because the selector may be defined on either the `aria-label` attribute or the `data-testid` attribute. In the beginning, the selectors used the `aria-label` attribute, but now most selectors have been migrated to use the `data-testid` attribute instead.

# Locating Grafana UI elements

All pages defined by `@grafana/plugin-e2e` expose a `getByTestIdOrAriaLabel` method that locates elements using the right HTML attribute. Whenever you want to resolve a Playwright locator based on a Grafana UI selector, you should always use this method.

```tsx
panelEditPage.getByTestIdOrAriaLabel(selectors.components.CodeEditor.container).click();
```

> ## The `e2e-selectors` fixture

Author: The name of the fixture is `selectors`

Reviewer 2: good catch
